---
layout: lesson
title: LaTeX Beamer
category: week4
description: Presentations with LaTeX Beamer.
---

Structure of a presentation
---------------------------

In LaTeX it is possible to make presentations using the document class
`beamer`. An empty presentation looks as follows:

```latex
\documentclass{beamer}

\usetheme{Copenhagen}
\author{Bert}
\title{A tale of two primes}

\begin{document}

\end{document}
```

To make slides you can use the `frame` environment with the title of
your slide as the single argument. For example one could write (inside
the `document` environment):

```latex
\begin{frame}
\titlepage
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Article}
Some text about the article.
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Mathematica}
A helpful tool for mathematicians.
\end{frame}
```

This gives a title slide and two slides with a header and some text.

To order the information in your presentation you can use the `block`,
`columns`, `enumerate` and `itemize` environments. The `block`
environment is a `beamer` specific environment which can be used in the
following way:

```latex
\begin{frame}{Article}

\begin{block}{Example}
This is an example of a block.
\end{block}

\begin{block}{Euclid's theorem}
This is a theorem.
\end{block}

\end{frame}
```

The block's header can be removed by adding an empty group `{}` after
`\begin{block}`.


Pauses
-------
If you want the elements of your slide to appear one by one you can use
`\pause`. This command can be placed almost anywhere in the code. For
example between two `block` environments:

```latex
\begin{frame}{Article}

\begin{block}{Definition}
This is a definition.
\end{block}

\pause

\begin{block}{Euclid's theorem}
This is a theorem.
\end{block}

\end{frame}
```

or in an `enumerate`

```latex
\begin{frame}{Title}

\begin{enumerate}
\item Element
\pause
\item Element
\pause
\item Element
\end{enumerate}

\end{frame}
```

Layout
------

Previously we used the beamer theme `Copenhagen`. More themes can be
found in the [Beamer Theme
Matrix](http://www.hartwork.org/beamer-theme-matrix/). Try adding the
following lines in the preamble.

```latex
\usetheme{Warsaw}
\usecolortheme{beaver}
```

A beamer template in the style of the University of Amsterdam can be
found [here](http://bliggy.net/UvATemplates.html).

Sample presentation
-------------------

On Blackboard a sample `.tex` document can be found which you can use
for your presentation.

Tips for a short presentation
-----------------------------

#### Isolate the main subject and make sure to cover it early in your presentation.

Try to deliver one message to your fellow students; if you succeed doing
just that, your presentation is already a success. If you want your
audience to remember something, tell it early on in your presentation.

#### Use pictures instead of text

A presentation is a story that the presenter tells the audience. The
`beamer` slides only serve to support that story. Don't write down
everything that you want to tell, filter the content. Try to replace
text by pictures where possible.

#### Examples instead of abstract definitions

Abstract definitions can be hard for the audience to grasp immediately.
Illustrate definitions using examples. Sometimes it is convenient to
give an example before stating the formal definition.

#### Watch the time

You only get 5 minutes for this presentation. Keep this in mind when
creating the presentation and make sure to practise it to ensure its
length is good. Also keep the length in mind when choosing the number of
frames.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### References

1.  Landsman. [*Hoe geef ik een wiskundige
    voordracht?*](http://www.nieuwarchief.nl/serie5/pdf/naw5-2001-02-4-351.pdf)
