---
layout: lesson
title: Errors and warnings
category: week1
description: Error fixing 101.
---

{{toc}}

If LaTeX runs into code it doesn't understand it will stop typesetting
and will give information about the error. It can also output warnings.

Errors
------

If TeXworks encounters an error it will show a message in the `console`
and wait. Such a message looks like

<pre><code class='text'>! Undefined control sequence.
l.6 \authr
</code></pre>

It starts with an exclamation mark and a description of the error
(`Undefined control sequence`), followed by the line number (`6`) and
the command where the error occured (`\authr`). Watch out: the line
number that is displayed doesn't have to be the location where the error
in your code was made. For example, if you forget a `}` then LaTeX will
probably find out at the end of a paragraph.
When an error is encountered you can stop typesetting and fix it.
Alternatively, there are ways to surpress errors, but we recommend that
you always fix your errors. If you don't do this, it is possible that
the errors stack up and the output is not as desired.

We will now discuss some errors that occur very often.

#### Too many }'s

<pre><code class='text'>! Too many }'s.
l.6 \date December 2004}
</code></pre>

There is a `}` without a matching `{`. In this case we forgot `{` after
`\date`.

#### Undefined control sequence

<pre><code class='text'>! Undefined control sequence.
l.6 \dtae
{December 2004}
</code></pre>

An unknown command was used, here `\dtae`, which should have been
`\date`.

#### Missing $ inserted

<pre><code class='text'>! Missing $ inserted.
&lt;inserted text&gt;
$ 
l.6 \alpha
</code></pre>

A math command was used in text mode, in this case `\alpha`.

#### Runaway argument

<pre><code class='text'>Runaway argument?
{December 2004 \maketitle
! Paragraph ended before \date was complete.
&lt;to be read again&gt;
\par
l.8
</code></pre>

In this example we forgot the `}` belonging to the `\date` command.

#### Missing package

<pre><code class='text'>! LaTeX Error: File `babl.sty' not found.
Type X to quit or &lt;RETURN&gt; to proceed,
or enter new name. (Default extension: sty)
Enter file name:
</code></pre>

Here we misspelled `babel`. It could also happen that the name is
correct but the package is not installed yet. Packages can be installed
with the TeX Live Utility if you're using TeX Live.
You can also put the `.sty` file of the package (download it from
[CTAN](http://www.ctan.org)) in the folder of your `.tex` file.

#### \begin{itemize} ended by \end{document}.

<pre><code class='text'>! LaTeX Error: \begin{itemize} on input line 15 ended by
\end{document}.
l.127 \end{document}
</code></pre>

LaTeX found a `\begin{itemize}` without an `\end{itemize}`. This is a
typical example of a mistake which is discovered very late (the mistake
somewhere around line 20 is discovered at line 127).

#### Package babel Error: You haven't loaded the language dutch yet.

<pre><code class='text'>! Package babel Error: You haven't loaded the language dutch yet.
See the babel package documentation for explanation.
Type H &lt;return&gt; for immediate help.
...
l.3 \select@language{dutch}
</code></pre>

This happens when one changes the language in the `babel` package. The
solution is to delete the `.aux` file. In TeXworks this can be done by
`File -> Remove Aux Files`.
(If you get an error about permissions when doing this, you have to make
sure to work in one of your own folders and not in a temporary folder.
Moving your `.tex` file will solve your problem.)

Warnings
--------

Sometimes LaTeX gives warnings. For example if you use `\maketitle` but
never inserted an author it will display:

<pre><code class='text'>LaTeX Warning: No \author given.
</code></pre>

LaTeX won't stop typesetting after a warning. To see a list of warnings
in TeXworks go to `Window -> Show Console Output`.

#### Overfull hbox

<pre><code class='text'>Overfull \hbox (10.00104pt too wide) in paragraph at lines 6--7
</code></pre>

This warning indicates that a word does not fit on a line correctly.
This happens when LaTeX doesn't know how to break a word or because
there is a long line in math mode in a sentence. It can be solved by
adding `\-` to words, as discussed previously. If nothing works you can
add `\\` to break a line manually but this only should be done when the
entire text is finished.
The converse of an *overfull* box is an *underfull* box.

Solving errors
--------------

We conclude with a few general tips on how to solve errors.

#### Find the problem by commenting out text temporarily

Often you don't know what exactly causes the error. To discover the
cause it can be useful to turn off parts of your code using `%`. In
TeXworks you can also click `Format -> Comment`. If the code runs
afterwards, the mistake has to be in the part which you commented out.

#### Delete auxillary files

Sometimes an error is caused by auxillary files. If you cannot explain
an error, try deleting these files. In TeXworks this can be done with
`File -> Remove Aux Files`.

#### Typeset regularly

It is considered a good habit to typeset your document after typing a
few new sentences. If you typeset after 100 lines it can be hard to
trace back your errors. Once you get more familiar with writing `.tex`
documents you can reduce this, e.g. typeset only once a paragraph is
finished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="panel panel-primary">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Exercise

</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
Fix all mistakes in the Dutch article below. Let one of your teachers
check your solution.
<pre><code class='tex'>\documentclass[a4paper]{article}
\usepackage[dutch]{babel}
\begin{document}
\sectoin*{Oneindig veel priemgetallen, door Alex van den Brandhof}

Je kunt op heel veel manieren bewijzen dat er oneindig veel
priemgetallen bestaan. Filip Saidak, wiskundige van de universiteit van
North Carolina in Greensboro (VS), publiceerde onlangs in de American
Mathematical Monthly een nieuw, verrassend eenvoudig bewijs.

Een \emph{priemgetal} is een getal met precies twee delers. Het
kleinste priemgetal is 2 en de rij gaat zo verder: \$3, 5, 7, 11, 13,
17, \ldots Dat er nooit een eind aan deze rij komt, werd al 300 jaar
voor Christus bewezen door de Griek Euclides. Hoewel het niet bekend is
of Euclides de eerste is geweest die dit kon bewijzen, wordt de stelling
dat er oneindig veel priemgetallen bestaan aan hem toegekend. Euclides
is beroemd vanwege zijn dertiendelige boek De Elementen, waarin hij een
logische opbouw van de wiskunde, met name de meetkunde, geeft.

\subsection*{Bouwstenen}
De priemgetallen worden wel beschouwd als de bouwstenen van de gehele
getallen. Elk positief geheel getal is \' of priem, \'of het is te
schrijven als een product van priemgetallen. Zo is 8 gelijk aan \$2\cdot 2 \cdot 2,
 9 is gelijk aan \$3 \cdot 3$ en 10 is gelijk aan 2
\cdot 5$. Zo'n product van priemgetallen (de priemfactoren) heet wel
de \emph{priemfactorontbinding van het betreffende getal. Omdat het
getal 1 per definitie geen priemgetal is, is de priemfactorontbinding
van een geheel getal groter dan 1 uniek.

\subsection*(Een nieuw bewijs}
Filip Saidak, een Slowaaks wiskundige die tegenwoordig werkzaam is op de
universiteit van North Carolina in Greensboro, publiceerde in de
American Mathematical Monthly van december 2006 een nieuw bewijs van de
stelling dat er oneindig veel priemgetallen bestaan. Saidaks bewijs
luidt als volgt.

Stel $n$ is een geheel getal groter dan 1. De getallen $n$ en $n +
1$ verschillen slechts 1 en hebben dus geen gemeenschappelijke
priemfactoren. Dat betekent dat het getal $N_2 = n(n + 1)$$ ten
minste twee verschillende priemfactoren heeft. Voor de getallen \$N\_2\$
en $N_2 + 1$ geldt hetzelfde: zij verschillen slechts 1 en moeten dus
ten minste twee verschillende priemfactoren hebben. Het getal $N_3 =
N_2( N_2 + 1) = n(n + 1)[ n(n + 1) + 1}$ heeft dus minimaal drie
verschillende priemfactoren.

Dit proces kan eindeloos worden voortgezet: het getal $N_k$ heeft ten
minste $k$ priemfactoren. Omdat dit voor elk positief geheel getal
$k$ geldt, kan de rij priemgetallen nooit ophouden.
\end{document}
</code></pre>

</div>
</div>
<div class="panel panel-success">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Remember

</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
-   What does an error consist of?
-   What to do with an error?
-   Where can you find warnings?

</div>
</div>
