---
layout: lesson
title: Basics
category: week1
description: LaTeX fundamentals
---
This lesson is about the basics of LaTeX. 

Typesetting
--------------

LaTeX is used to typeset scientific documents. It is based on the
programming language TeX, which is designed for writing mathematical
texts. There are fundamental differences between LaTeX and other word
processors such as MS Word and Pages.

##### Pros

-   One can concentrate on the structure and content of the document,
    without worrying about the layout.
-   The layout is consistent.
-   Mathematical expressions can be inserted easily.
-   It is easy to number and refer to equations.
-   One is forced to structure every document well.

##### Cons

-   In most editors is not possible to see the result of your
    code immediately.
-   One has to learn LaTeX commands.
-   Some layout elements cannot be edited easily.

The approach LaTeX used is called *What You See Is What You Mean*; when
writing the document you can't see the final result. Instead you see the
structure of the document.

Mathematics
-----------

In this course you will learn to work with TeXworks. However, everything
you learn about LaTeX itself is independent of your LaTeX editor.

TeXworks
:   A simple editor which is included in the LaTeX distributions MikTeX
    and TeX Live.

ShareLaTeX
:   An online editor where you can collaborate with others. It is
    convenient to use this on computers where LaTeX isn't installed. 
    Nowadays lots of students use ShareLaTeX, but to learn LaTeX we start using TeXworks. 
    Afterwards students are free to use ShareLaTeX. 

In the first exercise we will assume that you use TeXworks. To install
this, see [Installing LaTeX]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 0000-01-01-installinglatex %}).

<div class="panel panel-primary">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Exercise 1

</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
1.  Open 'TeXworks' on your computer.
2.  Paste the following code in an empty document and save it as
    'helloworld.tex'. The extension of a TeX file always is '.tex'.

	<pre><code class='tex'>\documentclass[a4paper]{article}
\begin{document}
Hello world!
\end{document}</code></pre>

3. Select 'pdfLaTeX' in the menu to the right of the green button and
press the green button afterwards. We call this *typesetting*. LaTeX
turns your code into a PDF document which you will see in a new window.

-   Useful: Select 'Format -> Syntax Coloring -> LaTeX' to colour
    your code.
-   Useful: To jump from the code to the output in TeXworks you can
    right-click and choose 'Jump to PDF'. In the same way it is possible
    to switch from the pdf to the code.

</div>
</div>
<div class="panel panel-primary">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Exercise 2</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
1.  One your computer create a folder `LaTeX` (a subfolder of the computeralgebra/latex-folder)
2.  Place the example file created above in this folder.
3.  Do the same with all the LaTeX-files you will use in this course. 

</div>
</div><div class="panel panel-primary">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Exercise 3</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
1.  Download this [introductory LaTeX document](ftp://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/base/small2e.tex).
2.  Open this file in TeXworks.
3.  Typeset the document. 
4.  Compare the input with the output. 

</div>
</div><div class="panel panel-primary">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Exercise 4</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
1.  Download this [introductory LaTeX document](ftp://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/base/sample2e.tex).
2.  Open this file in TeXworks.
3.  Typeset the document. 
4.  Compare the input with the output. 

</div>
</div>
From now on we start using TeXworks. In the final exam TeXworks will be used. 

Resources
---------

We encourage you to use not only this website, but also other resources
if you can't figure something out yourself. The following websites
provide useful information:

[LaTeX Wikibooks](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX)
:   An up-to-date collection of articles about LaTeX. The standard resource for this course. 

[TeX - LaTeX Stack Exchange](http://tex.stackexchange.com)
:   A question and answer site with many active users. For the students who want to know more. 

<div class="panel panel-success">
<div class="panel-heading">
<h3 class="panel-title">
Remember

</h3>
</div>
<div class="panel-body">
- LaTeX typesets paragraphs.
- A blank line in the code (or \par) starts a new paragraph.
- LaTeX automatically indents paragraphs. First paragraphs (of a chapter, of a section) are not indented. 
- Inline formulas go between single dollar signs <code class='tex'>$...$</code>
- Displayed formulas go between <code class='tex'>\[ ... \]</code>
- In **math mode** spaces you type are ignored
- Format your code the same ways the text is supposed to be typeset, i.e. put the <code class='tex'>\[</code>and <code class='tex'>\]</code>-commands on a seperate line in the code, with in between the formula to be displayed. 

</div>
</div>
